---
authors: 
- Tom Engelhardt
categories: 
- LMD
title: "Tom Engelhardt:The revelations of Edward Snowden"
date: "2014-02-26"
---
> Tom Engelhardt: The revelations of Edward Snowden - LMD; 2014-02-26

Intelligence officials have estimated just how many secret files National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden took when he headed for Hong Kong last June: 1.7 million. At least they claim that as the number he accessed. Let’s assume that it’s accurate, and add a caveat. Whatever he had with him when he left the agency, Edward Snowden did not take all the NSA’s classified documents. Many millions of NSA documents did not get the Snowden treatment.

What he did take will occupy journalists for years (and historians long after that). However, the NSA is only one of 17 outfits in the US intelligence community. Some of the others are as large and well funded, and all generate their own troves of secret documents. That’s just intelligence agencies. If you’re thinking about the full sweep of our national security state (NSS), you also have to include the Department of Homeland Security, the Energy Department (responsible for the US nuclear arsenal) and the Pentagon. We’re talking about secret documentation that an army of journalists, researchers and historians wouldn’t have a hope of getting through in a century.

We do know that, in 2011, the whole government classified 92,064,862 documents. If typical, that means, in the 21st century, the NSS has already generated hundreds of millions of documents that could not be read by an American without a security clearance. Of those, thanks to one man, we have had access to a tiny percentage of 1.7 million. You the voter, the taxpayer, the citizen — in what we still like to think of as a democracy — are automatically excluded from knowing or learning about most of what the national security state does in your name, unless its officials decide to cherry-pick information they feel you are capable of safely absorbing — or an Edward Snowden releases documents over the bitter protests and death threats of Washington officialdom.

Summoned from its id
====================

So far, even among critics, the debate about Snowden’s act has generally focused on „balance”; on what’s the right equilibrium between a governmental need for secrecy, the security of the country, and an American urge for privacy, freedom and transparency — for knowing what your government is doing. Such a framework has proved a comfortable one for Washington, which doesn’t mind focusing on the supposedly knotty question of how to define the „limits” of secrecy and whistle-blowing, and what „reforms” are needed to bring the two into line. In the present context such a debate seems laughable, if not absurd.

It’s clear from the numbers that the urge to envelop the national security state in a blanket of secrecy, to shield its workings from its citizens (as well as allies and enemies) has proven boundless, as have the ambitions of those running that state. There is no way, at present, to limit the governmental urge for secrecy, certainly not via secret courts or congressional committees entangled in the processes of a secret system.

In the face of such boundlessness, perhaps the words whistleblower and leaker — both traditionally referring to focused activities — are no longer useful. Though we may not yet have a word to describe what Chelsea (once Bradley) Manning, Julian Assange and Edward Snowden have done, we should stop calling them whistleblowers. Perhaps they should be considered the creations of an overweening national security state, summoned by us from its id to act as a counterforce to its ambitions. Imagine them as representing the societal unconscious. Only in this way can we explain the boundlessness of their acts. Such massive document appropriations are inconceivable without a secret state endlessly documenting its own darkness.

One thing is for certain, though no one thinks to say it: despite their staggering releases of insider information, when it comes to the true nature and extent of the NSS, we remain in the dark. In the feeling that, thanks to Manning and Snowden, we now grasp the depths of that secret state, its secret acts and secret documentation, we are deluded. Snowden’s revelations have helped promote this delusion. In a way that hasn’t happened since the Watergate era of the 1970s, they have given us the feeling that a curtain has been pulled back on the true nature of the Washington system, and we have glimpsed a global surveillance state-in-the-making of astounding scope, reach and technological proficiency, whose ambitions should take our breath away. And yet, while this is accurate enough, it leads us to believe that we now know a great deal about the secret world of Washington. This is an illusion.

Even if we knew what was in all of those 1.7 million NSA documents, they are a mere drop. We have the revelations of one (marginal) insider who told us about part of what a single agency documented about its own activities. The global debate, controversy, anger and discussion, Snowden has said, represents „mission accomplished” for him. But it shouldn’t be mission accomplished for the rest of us.

The dangers of sunshine
=======================

To gain a reasonable picture of our national security state, 20 Snowdens, each at a different agency, would have to step out of the shadows — just for starters. Then we would need a media that was ready to roll and a Congress not wrapped in „security” and „secrecy” but demanding answers, as the Church committee did in the Watergate era, with subpoenas in hand.

We may have access to basic information about what the NSA has been up to, but what do you know about the Pentagon’s Defense Intelligence Agency, with its 16,500 employees, which has embarked on „an ambitious plan to assemble an espionage network that rivals the CIA in size” ([1](http://mondediplo.com/2014/03/12state#nb1))? How about the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency with its 16,000 employees, its post 9/11 headquarters and its control over spy satellites prowling the planetary skies?

The answer is no more than you would have known about the NSA if Snowden hadn’t acted. And what do you know about the FBI, which now issues thousands of national security letters a year (16,511 in 2011) ([2](http://mondediplo.com/2014/03/12state#nb2)), an unknown number of them for terror investigations? Since their recipients are not allowed to discuss them, we know next to nothing about what the Bureau is doing. And how’s your info on the CIA, which takes \$4bn more out of the intelligence black budget than the NSA, runs its own private wars and has organised its own privatised corps of spies as part of the expansion of US intelligence and espionage abroad?

Or take that old-fashioned, low-tech surveillance: government informers and agents provocateurs. They were commonplace in the 1960s and early 1970s within every oppositional movement. They are with us again. Thanks to the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), which has mapped reports in which informers made it into at least the local news, we know that they became part of what anti-war movements existed, slipped into the Occupy movement and have run riot in Muslim-American communities. We know that these informers come from a wide range of outfits, including the local police, the military and the FBI. However, we have just about no inside information on the extent of old-style informing, surveilling and provoking.

One thing couldn’t be clearer: the mania for secrecy has grown in the Obama years. On entering the Oval Office in 2009, Obama proclaimed a sunshine administration dedicated to openness and transparency. That announcement now drips with irony. If you want a measure of the kind of secrecy the White House condones these days, check out a recent *Los Angeles Times *piece ([3](http://mondediplo.com/2014/03/12state#nb3)) on the CIA’s drone assassination programme (one of the more overt aspects of Washington’s covert world).

That paper recently reported that the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Carl Levin, held a joint classified hearing with the Senate Intelligence Committee on the CIA, the Pentagon, and their drone campaigns against terror suspects in the backlands of the planet. But CIA officials normally testify only before the House and Senate intelligence committees. In this case, the White House „refused to provide the necessary security clearances for members of the House and Senate armed services committees.” As a result, it would not let CIA witnesses appear before Levin. Officials „had little appetite for briefing the 26 senators and 62 House members who sit on the armed services committees on the CIA’s most sensitive operations.” Sunshine is considered potentially dangerous, even in tiny doses, even in Congress.

Cult of government secrecy
==========================

In evaluating what may lie behind the many curtains of Washington, history does offer us a little help.  Thanks to the revelations of the 1970s, including a 1971 break-in by anti-war activists at an FBI office in Media, Pennsylvania, which opened a window into the Bureau’s illegality, plus some famous reporting and the thorough work of the Church committee in the Senate, we have a sense of what the national security state was capable of when enveloped in a penumbra of secrecy (even if, in that era, the technology could do so much less). In the Johnson and Nixon years, the FBI, the CIA, the NSA and other acronymic outfits committed staggering misdeeds, provocations and crimes.

It’s easy to say that post-Watergate reforms made such acts a thing of the past. Unfortunately, there’s no reason to believe that. The nature of that era’s reforms should be reconsidered: one important Congressional response was to create the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISA), a judiciary for the secret world that would generate a significant body of law that no American outside the NSS could see. After the headlines, the congressional inquiries, the impeachment proceedings, the ending of two presidencies — one by resignation — and black bag jobs, break-ins, buggings, attempted beatings, blackmail, massive spying and surveillance, the answer was a secret court. Its judges, appointed by the chief justice of the Supreme Court alone, are charged with ruling after hearing only one side of any case involving a governmental desire to snoop or pry or surveil. The court has proved a willing rubber stamp for any urge of the national security state. This remedy for government illegality was just another step in the institutionalisation of a secret world that looks like an Orwellian nightmare. In creating the FISA court, Congress took the extra-Constitutional, extra-legal acts of the Nixon era and put them under the rule of (secret) law.

Today, after the rampant extra-legality of the Global War on Terror — including the setting up of a secret, extrajudicial global prison system of „black sites”, illegal kidnappings of terror suspects and renditions to the prisons of torture regimes, and the assassination-by-drone of American citizens — it’s clear that NSS officials feel they have near total impunity. (Not that their secret acts often turn out as planned.) They know that nothing they do will be brought before an open court of law. While the rest of us remain inside the legal system, they exist in post-legal America. Now, the president claims that he’s preparing new reforms to bring this system under check. Watch out!

Protected from the law by a spreading cult of government secrecy, beyond the reach of the citizenry, Congress or the aboveground judicial system, supported by the White House and a body of secret law, knowing that no act undertaken in the name of American „safety” and „security” will ever be prosecuted, the inhabitants of our secret state have been moving in dark and disturbing ways.  What we know is already disturbing enough.  What we don’t know would unnerve us far more. Shadow government has conquered 21st-century Washington. We have the makings of a thug state.
