---
authors:
- Michael Ignatieff
categories:
- FT
title: "Hungary’s abuse of the rule of law is now incontrovertible"
date: "2020-10-08"
---

> Ft

*The writer is rector of Central European University*

In 2017, Viktor Orban’s Fidesz majority in the Hungarian parliament passed “lex CEU” to throw Central European University out of Budapest. On Tuesday, Europe’s highest court threw out the law, declaring that it violated European human rights laws on academic freedom and university autonomy, EU laws on freedom of services and World Trade Organization rules guaranteeing freedom to operate a business.

The judgment comes late the university has already been forced to move
most of its teaching to Vienna but it is a landmark ruling that is
bound to dissuade other European regimes from similar attacks on free
institutions. It is also a watershed moment in Europe’s fierce debate
about whether to tie the €1.7tn recovery package to the rule of
law. Now EU governments cannot keep pretending that Hungary’s relation
to the rule of law is unclear. Its highest court has declared it in
breach of fundamental rights.

For EU governments, the moment of truth has arrived. They should seize
the moment to decide, this week, that states that repeatedly breach
essential elements of European rule of law, as Hungary has done, must
return to the European path. If not, no funds.

If EU states fail to act this time, Europe’s identity as a community
grounded in the rule of law will suffer a fatal blow and the long slow
slide towards authoritarianism in central and eastern Europe could
accelerate beyond the point of no return.

If you think this exaggerates, look at what has happened in Hungary
since 2017. Because Mr Orban’s attack on CEU was not stopped in time,
his appetite for control has grown. In 2018, the country’s most
distinguished academic institution, the Academy of Sciences, was
stripped of its budget and autonomy. In 2019, the government began
privatising the university system and placing government appointees on
supervisory boards. This month, a colonel was placed in charge of the
University of Theatre and Film Arts, despite continuing protests by
faculty and students.

All this in a country where free debate is stifled by a systematic
takeover of independent media. Close to 80 per cent of Hungary’s media
are now in the hands of interests favourable to the regime.

The “lex CEU” saga is not just an EU affair. The university is
accredited in the US and issues American degrees, although the current
US administration and its ambassador in Budapest did nothing to stop
an ally from expelling an American institution. EU leaders, while
embarrassed that a university was being thrown out of an EU state,
ducked the challenge by claiming it was a US problem. Actually, CEU is
also accredited in Europe and so remains an EU problem.

Because neither the EU nor the US stood up to Mr Orban, CEU became the
only university, since the 1930s, to be expelled from a European
state.

This act of vandalism cost the university dear: a dislocating
relocation for faculty, staff and students and nearly €200m of
additional expenses. By contrast, CEU will stay in Vienna, because
Austria understands that academic freedom requires the rule of
law. Austria’s welcome is also a sign that it wants the capital to be
a centre of academic excellence.

Now that “lex CEU” has been declared inapplicable in Hungary, the
university is free to decide what programmes it can operate in
Budapest. We’ve set up a democracy institute to maintain our research
presence, along with our archives, library and institute for advanced
study. Thanks to the judgment, we can resume teaching US accredited
degree programmes in Budapest.

CEU is proud that the European Court of Justice vindicated our battle
for academic freedom and the rule of law. It would be intolerable,
however, if the European Commission and European Council failed to
hold Mr Orban to account. This is a watershed moment. EU leaders must
enforce the values they were elected to defend.
