---
authors: 
- Joseph Stiglitz
categories: 
- Demo
authors: 
- This week Republicans unveiled a budget proposal for 2012 that cuts more than \$5.8 trillion in government spending over the next decade. The plan calls for sweeping changes to Medicaid and Medicare, while reducing the top corporate and individual tax rates to 25 percent. We speak to Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz, who addresses the growing class divide taking place in the United States and inequality in a new \emph{Vanity Fair} article titled "Of the 1, by the 1, for the 1\%." Stiglitz is a professor at Columbia University and author of numerous books, most recently \emph{Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy}. "It's not just that the people at the top are getting richer," Stiglitz says. "Actually, they're gaining, and everybody else is decreasing... And right now, we are worse than old Europe."
authors: 
- Joseph Stiglitz is a Nobel Prize-winning economist, professor at Columbia University, author of numerous books, most recently \emph{Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy}.
title: "Joseph Stiglitz is a Nobel Prize-winning economist, professor at Columbia University, author of numerous books, most recently \emph{Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy}.:Assault on Social Spending"
date: "2011-04-07"
---
> Joseph Stiglitz is a Nobel Prize-winning economist, professor at Columbia University, author of numerous books, most recently \emph{Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy}.: Assault on Social Spending - Demo; 2011-04-07

This week Republicans unveiled a budget proposal for 2012 that cuts more than \$5.8 trillion in government spending over the next decade. The plan calls for sweeping changes to Medicaid and Medicare, while reducing the top corporate and individual tax rates to 25 percent. We speak to Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz, who addresses the growing class divide taking place in the United States and inequality in a new *Vanity Fair* article titled “Of the 1, by the 1, for the 1%.” Stiglitz is a professor at Columbia University and author of numerous books, most recently *Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy*. “It’s not just that the people at the top are getting richer,” Stiglitz says. “Actually, they’re gaining, and everybody else is decreasing... And right now, we are worse than old Europe.”

Meanwhile, Republicans remain locked in an impasse with Democrats and the White House over a budget to cover the remainder of 2011. Last night President Obama and House Speaker John Boehner met to narrow their differences in order to avoid the first government shutdown in 15 years, but they failed to come to an agreement.

On Tuesday, Speaker Boehner said Republicans might now seek up to \$40 billion in cuts—around \$7 billion more than both sides had discussed over the past week. Failure to agree on a budget would lead to a federal government shutdown beginning Friday at midnight. President Obama blamed Republicans for the political stalemate.

Joseph Stiglitz is a Nobel Prize-winning economist, professor at Columbia University, author of numerous books, most recently *Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy*.

Welcome to *Democracy Now!*

At the same time, there’s really shrinking opportunity. You know, we used to think of the United States as the land of opportunity—Horatio Alger, anybody could make it. And we used to think of ourselves as different from old Europe, as we used to call it. But the statistics show otherwise. Now, yes, we have some dramatic examples of people making it from the bottom to the top, middle to the top. But the statistics look at what happens on average: what is the chance of somebody at the bottom making it to the middle or the middle making it to the top? And right now, we are worse than old Europe. This is something dramatic that has happened over the last 30, 40 years.

And what’s really happened is old Europe has become more of a land of opportunity. They reformed their education systems after World War II. They said that they had—they recognized they had a problem, and they changed. Meanwhile, the United States, we’ve wound up with a more fractionated society, one where more—moved more to a private education system, where those who have money can get a really first-class education. But the average American is not. And, you know, those who come out of—those education statistics that came out not long ago where—show that, on average, Americans are doing more poorly than countries around the world.

And we—this is related to some of the issues that got raised in the context of the financial crisis. Remember the discussion about the bonuses? And that’s related to the same idea. The question was, if people were getting rewards for contributing to our society, a theory that was in the 19th century called “marginal-productivity theory,” then you could say, “OK, those who contribute more should get more.” But what we saw in that crisis was that these titans of the financial industry got mega-bonuses while their companies were making mega-losses. And while they were—as a result of their actions, our economy and the global economy went into a real tailspin, from which we have still not recovered. Their salaries have recovered, but not the rest of us.

One of the curious things—and again, this is bipartisan—we lowered the tax rates on speculators, so that speculators pay a much lower tax rate than people who work for a living. Now, is there any principle in economics that says that you should earn more money by speculating than by working hard? To me, it makes no sense. So, eliminating some of these special tax provisions would raise a lot of revenue and improve our deficit position.

This raises a very important point that I raise in my article, which is that much of the wealth of this one percent comes not from hard work, not from innovation, but from good investments in Washington, investing in political capital. And you saw that in the financial sector, where they first got deregulation, and they got a massive bailout. But it’s true in lots of other areas. A lot of the natural resource companies—mining, oil—get access to natural resources that are in public lands at a discount price. So, if you can buy—if you can get access to these resources at a very low price, sell them at a high price, you make a lot of money. It’s actually like money being stolen from the public.

But one of the points that I raised was that these people have an incentive not to see things accurately. You know, the nuclear power industry has an incentive to tell everybody, “Oh, don’t worry. Nothing—no risk there.” The financial sector had an incentive to say, “Don’t worry about these derivatives, even if they’re already a quadrillion dollars. Don’t worry, because we can manage that risk. We have systems of diversifying the risk across the economy.” Clearly wrong. So, you know, when there’s so much money at stake, people have a way of seeing—of discounting these risks, especially because those risks are borne by everybody else in our society.

And, you know, nuclear power is a really interesting case, because that industry has never been commercially viable. It has always existed on the back of a government-provided insurance, that we provide as taxpayers, that they don’t pay for. And we see now in Japan that, you know, they did the same thing, and we see the cost of that. The rest of society is paying an enormous price. There is no way that the slight savings in energy cost can make up for the loss to the Japanese economy that has resulted from the nuclear explosion. And the same thing could happen here in the United States.

And the second one is that obviously a house divided can’t stand, that you start getting tensions, you start not paying attention to the things that make us cohesive as a nation. And that’s what you’re seeing in Wisconsin. And you also see that in the budget messages that are coming across, saying, “OK, we’re going to cut back on healthcare for aged and for the poor, but we’re not going to do anything about overall healthcare costs.” What does that mean? It means that if you’re going to cut back on health expenditures for the aged and the poor, and you’re going to let health costs continue to rise, that says rationing. They’re not going to be able to get healthcare. Already, we spend more money with poor health outcomes than those in other countries in the advanced industrial world. And it’s going to get worse as the poor and the elderly can’t get access to healthcare.

Now, I thought that Bowles-Simpson is a recipe for making our economy weaker. If you start cutting budgets now, spending now, before the economy is back to health—you know, we already suffer from the deregulation, now this is going—we’re going to suffer again from the thoughtless deficit reduction. That means people are going to be out of jobs. That means revenues are going to be lower, and our economy is going to be weaker.

But the second point I raise is that it goes back to: look at where the revenues are going to be. When you have so much money going to the upper one percent, the only way of fixing the revenue problem is to raise taxes and have a more fair tax system. What they proposed was eliminating some of the deductions, say, for housing, mortgages. Well, if you do that now, house prices, which have continued to decline, would decline even more. But the more fundamental point is, even if from the long-term point of view you want to get rid of these mortgage deductions, you shouldn’t do that on the backs of the middle class. That should be viewed as a revenue-neutral. You lower the mortgage deduction, but you also lower the tax rates to offset it. That’s not a revenue—shouldn’t be a revenue enhancer. These are the people who have been doing very badly for the last 10, 15, 20 years.

I believe we could have more security with much less spending. We are spending literally hundreds of billions of dollars for weapons that don’t work against enemies that don’t exist. The Cold War ended more than 20 years ago. And yet, if you look at our military, nobody seems to have told it that. Another way of thinking about it, we spend more money now than all the rest of the countries of the world, or almost as much as all the rest of the countries put together. And yet, when you have a case where you might arguably want some use of it—you know, to protect people who are being killed—we say we can’t do it, even in a small country of a few million people. We say, “Oh, no. Our military can’t do anything.” So we’ve been spending all this money and getting actually very little security for it. So my own feeling is that we could reduce our money, our expenditures markedly—particularly, get out of Afghanistan—and improve our security.
