---
authors:
-  Christiane Hoffmann
categories:
- Spiegel
title: "Brussels Prepares for a Protracted Fight with Poland and Hungary"
date: "2020-11-20"
---

> https://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/eu-budget-battle-brussels-prepares-for-a-protracted-fight-with-poland-and-hungary-a-ecd46d18-35ca-430e-8275-bcaae35ba1d7

**By vetoing the EU budget, Hungary and Poland have plunged the bloc into a crisis and heaped pressure on Angela Merkel to find a solution. Brussels, though, might have a way to turn the tables.**

European heads of state and government spoke for around three hours during their Thursday evening video conference, a pragmatic discussion focused primarily on the coronavirus. They talked about mutual recognition of test results, about preparations for a possible third wave, about vaccine distribution and about data collection on cross-border flights.

One issue, though, was not on the agenda, even though it is casting a pall over all of Europe at the moment: The refusal by Hungary and Poland to authorize the EU's Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF)  the bloc's budget for the next seven years. And the divide in the EU that has been deepened by this veto.

With Germany currently holding the rotating Council of the EU presidency, Chancellor Angela Merkel briefly addressed the conflict at the beginning of the video conference. But the budget discussion lasted only about a quarter of an hour before European Council President Charles Michel shifted the focus of the talks to COVID-19  in part, no doubt, because a solution to the budget conflict is as far away as ever.


"We have a duty to try to find a way forward," the chancellor said afterward. "But it's not one of the easier problems that we have to solve." European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, meanwhile, pushed for a rapid solution. "Millions of companies and people are waiting for our response in this unprecedented crisis."

Brussels is no stranger to serious conflict, whether its about money, the fair distribution of refugees or the degree to which the EU can intervene in member-state affairs on issues like climate change. But there is a lot at stake in the current crisis, far more than just the budget plan for the next seven years. It's also about the bloc's response to the corona crisis and assistance for those in need. And it's about the EU's core values. The MFF, after all, includes a clause linking EU funds to adherence to the rule of law. And that link is the source of the current feud.

This most recent EU crisis got its start last Monday with deafening silence. The EU ambassadors from the 27 member states had gathered in Room EB S7 on the seventh floor of the Europa building to discuss an historic package: the MFF for the next seven years and the coronavirus recovery fund, worth a total of 1.8 trillion euros. EU leaders had spent four days and nights in July hammering out the compromise, followed by weeks of negotiations with the European Parliament. Now, it was time for the ambassadors to approve the package. But the representatives from Hungary and Poland weren't having it.
